'\" -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH nslcd.conf 5 "Oct 2011" "Version 0.7.15" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
nslcd.conf \- configuration file for LDAP nameservice daemon
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fInss-pam-ldapd\fR package allows LDAP
directory servers to be used as a primary source of name service
information. (Name service information typically includes users, hosts,
groups, and other such data historically stored in flat files or
NIS.)
.PP
The file \*(T<\fInslcd.conf\fR\*(T> contains the
configuration information for running \fBnslcd\fR (see
\fBnslcd\fR(8)).
The file contains options, one on each line, defining the way
NSS lookups and PAM actions
are mapped to LDAP lookups.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "RUNTIME OPTIONS"
.TP 
\*(T<\fBthreads\fR\*(T> \fINUM\fR
Specifies the number of threads to start that can handle requests
and perform LDAP queries.
The default is to start 5 threads.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBuid\fR\*(T> \fIUID\fR
This specifies the user id with which the daemon should be run.
This can be a numerical id or a symbolic value.
If no uid is specified no attempt to change the user will be made.
Note that you should use values that don't need LDAP
to resolve.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBgid\fR\*(T> \fIGID\fR
This specifies the group id with which the daemon should be run.
This can be a numerical id or a symbolic value.
If no gid is specified no attempt to change the group will be made.
Note that you should use values that don't need LDAP
to resolve.
.SS "GENERAL CONNECTION OPTIONS"
.TP 
\*(T<\fBuri\fR\*(T> \fIURI\fR
Specifies the LDAP URI of the
server to connect to.
The URI scheme may be \*(T<ldap\*(T>,
\*(T<ldapi\*(T> or \*(T<ldaps\*(T>, specifying
LDAP over TCP,
ICP or SSL respectively (if
supported by the LDAP library).
Alternatively, the value \*(T<DNS\*(T> may be
used to try to lookup the server using DNS
SRV records.

When using the ldapi scheme, %2f should be used to escape slashes
(e.g. ldapi://%2fvar%2frun%2fslapd%2fldapi/), although most of the
time this should not be needed.

This option may be specified multiple times. Normally, only the first
server will be used with the following servers as fall-back (see
\*(T<\fBbind_timelimit\fR\*(T> below).

If LDAP lookups are used for host name resolution,
any host names should be specified as an IP address or name that can be
resolved without using LDAP.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBldap_version\fR\*(T> \fIVERSION\fR
Specifies the version of the LDAP protocol to use.
The default is to use the maximum version supported by the
LDAP library.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBbinddn\fR\*(T> \fIDN\fR
Specifies the distinguished name with which to bind to the directory
server for lookups.
The default is to bind anonymously.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBbindpw\fR\*(T> \fIPASSWORD\fR
Specifies the clear text credentials with which to bind.
This option is only applicable when used with \*(T<\fBbinddn\fR\*(T> above.
If you set this option you should consider changing the permissions
of the \*(T<\fInslcd.conf\fR\*(T> file to only grant access to
the root user.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBrootpwmoddn\fR\*(T> \fIDN\fR
Specifies the distinguished name to use when the root user tries to
modify a user's password using the PAM module. The PAM module prompts
the user for the admin password instead of the user's password.
.SS "SASL AUTHENTICATION OPTIONS"
.TP 
\*(T<\fBsasl_mech\fR\*(T> \fIMECHANISM\fR
Specifies the SASL mechanism to be used when
performing SASL authentication.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBsasl_realm\fR\*(T> \fIREALM\fR
Specifies the SASL realm to be used when performing
SASL authentication.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBsasl_authcid\fR\*(T> \fIAUTHCID\fR
Specifies the authentication identity to be used when performing
SASL authentication.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBsasl_authzid\fR\*(T> \fIAUTHZID\fR
Specifies the authorization identity to be used when performing
SASL authentication.
Must be specified in one of the formats: dn:<distinguished name>
or u:<username>.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBsasl_secprops\fR\*(T> \fIPROPERTIES\fR
Specifies Cyrus SASL security properties.
Allowed values are described in the
\fBldap.conf\fR(5)
manual page.
.SS "KERBEROS AUTHENTICATION OPTIONS"
.TP 
\*(T<\fBkrb5_ccname\fR\*(T> \fINAME\fR
Set the name for the GSS-API Kerberos credentials cache.
.SS "SEARCH/MAPPING OPTIONS"
.TP 
\*(T<\fBbase\fR\*(T> [\fIMAP\fR] \fIDN\fR
Specifies the base distinguished name (DN)
to use as search base.
This option may be supplied multiple times and all specified bases
will be searched.

A global search base may be specified or a MAP-specific one.
If no MAP-specific search bases are defined the global ones are used.

If, instead of a DN, the value
\fIDOMAIN\fR is specified, the host's
DNS domain is used to construct a search base.

If this value is not defined an attempt is made to look it up
in the configured LDAP server. Note that if the
LDAP server is unavailable during start-up
\fBnslcd\fR will not start.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBscope\fR\*(T> [\fIMAP\fR] sub[tree]|one[level]|base
Specifies the search scope (subtree, one level or base object).
The default scope is subtree; base scope is almost never useful for
name service lookups.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBderef\fR\*(T> never|searching|finding|always
Specifies the policy for dereferencing aliases.
The default policy is to never dereference aliases.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBreferrals\fR\*(T> yes|no
Specifies whether automatic referral chasing should be enabled.
The default behaviour is to chase referrals.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBfilter\fR\*(T> \fIMAP\fR \fIFILTER\fR
The \fIFILTER\fR
is an LDAP search filter to use for a
specific map.
The default filter is a basic search on the
objectClass for the map (e.g. \*(T<(objectClass=posixAccount)\*(T>).
.TP 
\*(T<\fBmap\fR\*(T> \fIMAP\fR \fIATTRIBUTE\fR \fINEWATTRIBUTE\fR
This option allows for custom attributes to be looked up instead of
the default RFC 2307 attributes.
The \fIMAP\fR may be one of
the supported maps below.
The \fIATTRIBUTE\fR is the one as
used in RFC 2307 (e.g. \*(T<userPassword\*(T>,
\*(T<ipProtocolNumber\*(T> or \*(T<macAddress\*(T>).
The \fINEWATTRIBUTE\fR may be any attribute
as it is available in the directory.

If the \fINEWATTRIBUTE\fR is presented in
quotes (") it is treated as an expression which will be evaluated
to build up the actual value used.
See the section on attribute mapping expressions below for more details.

Only some attributes for passwd and shadow entries may be mapped with
an expression (because other attributes may be used in search
filters).
For passwd entries the following attributes may be mapped with an
expression: \*(T<gidNumber\*(T>, \*(T<gecos\*(T>,
\*(T<homeDirectory\*(T> and \*(T<loginShell\*(T>.
For shadow entries the following attributes may be mapped with an
expression: \*(T<shadowLastChange\*(T>, \*(T<shadowMin\*(T>,
\*(T<shadowMax\*(T>, \*(T<shadowWarning\*(T>,
\*(T<shadowInactive\*(T>, \*(T<shadowExpire\*(T> and
\*(T<shadowFlag\*(T>.
.SS "TIMING/RECONNECT OPTIONS"
.TP 
\*(T<\fBbind_timelimit\fR\*(T> \fISECONDS\fR
Specifies the time limit (in seconds) to use when connecting to the
directory server.
This is distinct from the time limit specified in
\*(T<\fBtimelimit\fR\*(T> and affects the set-up of the connection only.
Note that not all LDAP client libraries have support
for setting the connection time out.
The default \*(T<\fBbind_timelimit\fR\*(T> is 10 seconds.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBtimelimit\fR\*(T> \fISECONDS\fR
Specifies the time limit (in seconds) to wait for a response from the
LDAP server.
A value of zero (0), which is the default, is to wait indefinitely for
searches to be completed.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBidle_timelimit\fR\*(T> \fISECONDS\fR
Specifies the period if inactivity (in seconds) after which the
connection to the LDAP server will be closed.
The default is not to time out connections.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBreconnect_sleeptime\fR\*(T> \fISECONDS\fR
Specifies the number of seconds to sleep when connecting to all
LDAP servers fails.
By default 1 second is waited between the first failure and the first
retry.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBreconnect_retrytime\fR\*(T> \fISECONDS\fR
Specifies the time after which the LDAP server is
considered to be permanently unavailable.
Once this time is reached retries will be done only once per this time period.
The default value is 10 seconds.
.PP
Note that the reconnect logic as described above is the mechanism that
is used between \fBnslcd\fR and the LDAP
server. The mechanism between the NSS and
PAM client libraries on one end and
\fBnslcd\fR on the other is simpler with a fixed compiled-in
time out of a 10 seconds for writing to \fBnslcd\fR and
a time out of 60 seconds for reading answers.
\fBnslcd\fR itself has a read time out of 0.5 seconds
and a write time out of 60 seconds.
.SS "SSL/TLS OPTIONS"
.TP 
\*(T<\fBssl\fR\*(T> on|off|start_tls
Specifies whether to use SSL/TLS or not (the default is not to). If
\fIstart_tls\fR
is specified then StartTLS is used rather than raw LDAP over SSL.
Not all LDAP client libraries support both SSL,
StartTLS and all related configuration options.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBtls_reqcert\fR\*(T> never|allow|try|demand|hard
Specifies what checks to perform on a server-supplied certificate.
The meaning of the values is described in the
\fBldap.conf\fR(5)
manual page.
At least one of \*(T<\fBtls_cacertdir\fR\*(T> and
\*(T<\fBtls_cacertfile\fR\*(T> is required if peer verification is
enabled.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBtls_cacertdir\fR\*(T> \fIPATH\fR
Specifies the directory containing X.509 certificates for peer
authentication.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBtls_cacertfile\fR\*(T> \fIPATH\fR
Specifies the path to the X.509 certificate for peer authentication.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBtls_randfile\fR\*(T> \fIPATH\fR
Specifies the path to an entropy source.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBtls_ciphers\fR\*(T> \fICIPHERS\fR
Specifies the ciphers to use for TLS.
See your TLS implementation's
documentation for further information.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBtls_cert\fR\*(T> \fIPATH\fR
Specifies the path to the file containing the local certificate for
client TLS authentication.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBtls_key\fR\*(T> \fIPATH\fR
Specifies the path to the file containing the private key for client
TLS authentication.
.SS "OTHER OPTIONS"
.TP 
\*(T<\fBpagesize\fR\*(T> \fINUMBER\fR
Set this to a number greater than 0 to request paged results from
the LDAP server in accordance with RFC2696.
The default (0) is to not request paged results.

This is useful for LDAP servers that contain a
lot of entries (e.g. more than 500) and limit the number of entries
that are returned with one request.
For OpenLDAP servers you may need to set
\*(T<\fBsizelimit size.prtotal=unlimited\fR\*(T>
for allowing more entries to be returned over multiple pages.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBnss_initgroups_ignoreusers\fR\*(T> user1,user2,...
This option prevents group membership lookups through
LDAP for the specified users. This can be useful
in case of unavailability of the LDAP server.
This option may be specified multiple times.

Alternatively, the value \*(T<ALLLOCAL\*(T> may be
used. With that value nslcd builds a full list of
non-LDAP users on startup.
.TP 
\*(T<\fBpam_authz_search\fR\*(T> \fIFILTER\fR
This option allows flexible fine tuning of the authorisation check that
should be performed. The search filter specified is executed and
if any entries match, access is granted, otherwise access is denied.

The search filter can contain the following variable references:
\*(T<$username\*(T>, \*(T<$service\*(T>,
\*(T<$ruser\*(T>, \*(T<$rhost\*(T>,
\*(T<$tty\*(T>, \*(T<$hostname\*(T>,
\*(T<$dn\*(T>, and \*(T<$uid\*(T>.
These references are substituted in the search filter using the
same syntax as described in the section on attribute mapping
expressions below.

For example, to check that the user has a proper authorizedService
value if the attribute is present:
\*(T<(&(objectClass=posixAccount)(uid=$username)
(|(authorizedService=$service)(!(authorizedService=*))))\*(T>

The default behaviour is not to do this extra search and always
grant access.
.SH "SUPPORTED MAPS"
The following maps are supported. They are referenced as
\fIMAP\fR in the options above.
.TP 
alias[es]
Mail aliases.
Note that most mail servers do not use the NSS
interface for requesting mail aliases and parse
\*(T<\fI/etc/aliases\fR\*(T> on their own.
.TP 
ether[s]
Ethernet numbers (mac addresses).
.TP 
group
Posix groups.
.TP 
host[s]
Host names.
.TP 
netgroup
Host and user groups used for access control.
.TP 
network[s]
Network numbers.
.TP 
passwd
Posix users.
.TP 
protocol[s]
Protocol definitions (like in \*(T<\fI/etc/protocols\fR\*(T>).
.TP 
rpc
Remote procedure call names and numbers.
.TP 
service[s]
Network service names and numbers.
.TP 
shadow
Shadow user password information.
.SH "ATTRIBUTE MAPPING EXPRESSIONS"
For some attributes a mapping expression may be used to construct the
resulting value. This is currently only possible for attributes that do
not need to be used in search filters.
.PP
The expressions are a subset of the double quoted string expressions in the
Bourne (POSIX) shell.
Instead of variable substitution, attribute lookups are done on the current
entry and the attribute value is substituted.
The following expressions are supported:
.TP 
\*(T<${attr}\*(T> (or \*(T<$attr\*(T> for short)
will substitute the value of the attribute
.TP 
\*(T<${attr:\-word}\*(T>
(use default) will substitbute the value of the attribute or, if the
attribute is not set or empty substitute the word
.TP 
\*(T<${attr:+word}\*(T>
(use alternative) will substitbute word if attribute is set, otherwise
substitute the empty string
.PP
The \fBnslcd\fR daemon checks the expressions to figure
out which attributes to fetch from LDAP.
Some examples to demonstrate how these expressions may be used in
attribute mapping:
.TP 
\*(T<"${shadowFlag:\-0}"\*(T>
use the \*(T<shadowFlag\*(T> attribute, using the
value 0 as default
.TP 
\*(T<"${homeDirectory:\-/home/$uid}"\*(T>
use the \*(T<uid\*(T> attribute to build a
\*(T<homeDirectory\*(T> value if that attribute is missing
.TP 
\*(T<"${isDisabled:+100}"\*(T>
if the \*(T<isDisabled\*(T> attribute is set, return 100,
otherwise leave value empty
.SH FILES
.TP 
\*(T<\fI/etc/nslcd.conf\fR\*(T>
the main configuration file
.TP 
\*(T<\fI/etc/nsswitch.conf\fR\*(T>
Name Service Switch configuration file
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBnslcd\fR(8),
\fBnsswitch.conf\fR(5)
.SH AUTHOR
This manual was written by Arthur de Jong <arthur@arthurdejong.org>
and is based on the
\fBnss_ldap\fR(5)
manual developed by PADL Software Pty Ltd.
